>> Of all nature's wild
and wondrous organisms,
there's one I've
rather fallen for.
Ah, that's lovely.
Because despite appearances,
seaweed has hidden superpowers.
Wow, as far as I
can see, there's
nothing but seaweed farms.
I'm Tim Flannery.
I'm a scientist and
environmental advocate.
I'm going to explore how
these humble weed has
become a $10 billion business.
It's all because seaweed is
one of the fastest-growing
lifeforms on the planet.
How long has this been growing?
>> I think just one season.
>> One season.
>> Yeah.
>> Wow.
And I'm going to
find out how seaweed
is being used to solve some of
the world's biggest problems--
[SPLASH]
>> There we go.
Beautiful.
>> --like growing
food for the future--
Wow, that is a fish.
--cleaning polluted water--
A million liters a day?
>> A million liters a day.
>> Go through this?
>> Yes.
>> --and even combating
climate change.
Once it gets down below
about a kilometer,
that cavity isn't coming back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But don't worry, this isn't
a gloom-and-doom film.
This is about solutions.
Wow, now Pia, this
is a science lab.
This is fantastic.
And with our endless
coastlines, Australia
could be a big player in a
global seaweed revolution.
Seaweed has to be just about
the most useful and underrated
stuff on the whole planet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[SEABIRDS SQUAWKING]
[MUSIC PLAYING, WATER BUBBLING]
I'm diving the waters
around Magnetic Island,
off the coast of
Northern Queensland,
and something's not right.
The Great Barrier Reef is
just a short boat ride away.
And where I should
see radiant coral,
this seaweed is taking over.
They're growing fast, partly on
nutrients that have washed off
the land along the coast.
The Great Barrier Reef
is really in trouble,
and part of the problem
comes from the land,
where there's farms.
Produce fertilizer, run down
the rivers into the ocean,
and cause things like seaweed to
really bloom and grow strongly.
And that can
overwhelm the coral.
But the good news is, there's
an entirely natural solution
to that kind of
pollution problem.
And it's all happening just a
couple of hours down the coast,
outside the town of Ayr.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've hit the road with one of
the world's foremost seaweed
experts, Professor Rocky de Nys.
>> You're more worried
about my driving skills than
the interview, Tim.
[CHUCKLING]
>> You be quiet.
So is there a lot of money going
into seaweed at the moment?
>> There is, because it does
such a good job in remediating
the environment.
There's millions of dollars
being invested in research.
>> That sounds fantastic.
I'd love to see
what you're doing.
>> Tim, let's go fishing.
>> Ah, now you got
me hooked, mate.
[CHUCKLING]
>> Nice, work.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Rocky's university has
teamed up with a technology firm
to develop an
experimental seafood farm.
Each pond holds 12 tons of
prawns, or 30 tons of fish.
There's over 100 ponds.
But the secret to this
whole place is seaweed.
Jeez, Rocky, these
are mighty fish, mate.
I've never heard
of cobia before.
What are they?
>> They're commonly known
as the black kingfish.
But they're an oceanic species.
And they've been adapted
to growing in ponds,
and they just do remarkably
well-- very fast,
very sustainable, and fearless.
>> I'm looking forward to see
how you go with the catching.
>> Well, I know these fellas
are being harvested today,
so we better do our best
to get a good look at one.
Good luck, Tim.
[MUSIC PLAYING, SPLASHING]
>> All right, now
one's interested.
They look big and
healthy, that's for sure.
>> They are.
They're a healthy specimen.
[SPLASHING]
>> Oh, there we go.
Got one.
>> Oh, that's a
healthy-looking specimen.
>> That's a beautiful
fish, isn't it?
>> Terrific, isn't it?
Just amazing.
>> Can I give you that, mate?
>> You can, yes.
>> Just to have a good
look at this fella.
Wow, that is a fish.
Look at that guy.
>> It's tremendous, isn't it?
>> It is.
And how old is that fish?
>> That would be less
than two years old.
>> So they grow very fast.
>> Yeah, they're a tremendous
species for aquaculture.
They grow beautifully.
And fantastic taste.
>> But when you grow 30
tons of fish in a pond,
you create a lot of pollution,
particularly nitrogen
and phosphorus.
If it was returned
to the ocean, it
could create similar conditions
that I saw at Magnetic Island,
where seaweed was
out of control.
So before this
water gets anywhere
near the ocean or the reef,
rocky cleans it with seaweed.
Ah, so this is where
the seaweed comes in.
>> Yes, this is the water
being treated with the seaweed
to remove that nitrogen and
phosphorus that was coming out
of the water from
the fish that we saw.
>> Right.
So all of the
potential pollutants
that that would have
ended up on the reef
are being captured here.
>> They get captured.
And so with the sunlight,
and the nutrients,
and a seaweed that's
pre-adapted to grow very
quickly in the
environment, the water
gets cleaned and you end up
with a product at the same time.
>> So what volume can you
put through this plant?
>> Surprisingly, about
a megaliter a day.
>> A million liters a day--
>> A million liters a day.
>> --go through this?
>> Yes.
>> Well, I'd like to have
a closer look at the algae.
Is there anywhere I can do that?
>> Well, let's harvest some and
you can feel and see what it
looks like.
>> This is one of the world's
cleanest seafood farms
because its water is being
scrubbed by a special species
of seaweed, one that can survive
in pretty tough conditions.
So what sort of
seaweed is this, Rocky?
>> It's a species of
seaweed called ulva.
And it's commonly
called sea lettuce.
And the great thing about ulva
is it grows in the intertidal.
So it's really adapted
to grow with a big range
of temperature, really
strong sunlight,
and changes in salinity.
So as we go through the
growing seasons on the farm,
it's robust, and
it keeps growing,
and it provides year-round
bioremediation that we
need to maintain clean water.
>> So it can take anything
you throw at it, basically.
>> It's quite amazing
in that regard.
It's a tough customer.
There's no doubt about it.
>> And how fast does it grow?
>> Triple in a week.
>> Tripling in a week in volume.
>> Yes.
And that's why we
harvest every day.
>> So Rocky, why does
this stuff grow so fast?
>> It's quite amazing, isn't it?
So it's all photosynthetic.
So there are no structural
tissues holding it up.
It's not like a
tree with a trunk.
Everything that's there
has the capacity to grow.
The faster it grows, the
more nitrogen, phosphorous,
and carbon are taken
out of the system.
And when we harvest that,
it's ready to repurpose.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Rocky believes he's
turned fast-growing seaweed
into a pollution solution.
Farmed seafood has already
overtaken farmed beef
as a source of protein.
If it can be grown cleanly using
a natural process like seaweed,
it could help feed the
world without polluting
the environment.
[SIZZLING]
And it's lunchtime,
Queensland style.
Reef-friendly, seaweed-grown
tiger prawns, and a chance
to find out what Rocky is
doing with all the seaweed
he's growing.
>> Here you go, Tim.
>> Oh, Rocky, that
looks magnificent.
>> Doesn't it.
Fresh out of the pond.
>> Are they?
From the farm.
>> From the farm.
>> Wonderful, wow.
But what's this here?
This looks like a bit of your
weeds got mixed in with them.
>> Fresh off the farm as well.
>> Oh, really?
>> Something to try that adds
that extra touch of flavor.
>> OK.
Can I put a bit on one of yours?
>> You can, please, terrific.
>> Wonderful.
Well, I'm going to
hop into one of these.
>> All right.
Thanks, Tim.
>> Thanks mate.
Well, this is Queensland
for you, mate.
>> Perfect one day,
beautiful the next.
[CHUCKLING]
>> That's right.
>> Here we go.
Oh, that seaweed, actually, it's
a beautiful garnish on them.
But you're growing a ton
of this seaweed every day,
if I remember.
>> That's correct.
We do.
>> So you're not eating
a ton a day, are you?
>> That would be a challenge.
[CHUCKLING]
>> So where's most of your
crop going at the moment?
>> At the moment, it goes
into an organic fertilizer
that's used on
banana plantations.
>> And Rocky is experimenting
with a special long-lasting
fertilizer by baking his seaweed
into a kind of charcoal called
biochar.
Those prawns are delicious.
But I'm interested in your char.
>> Step this way.
>> Good stuff.
>> Here we go, Tim.
>> Ah ha.
>> Biochar.
Have a look at that.
>> Oh, yes.
Well, it's nicely
pelletized, Rocky.
Look at that.
Beautiful stuff there.
>> It comes out of
the kiln that way.
It's ready to go.
Yeah, it's fantastic.
Look at that-- beautiful.
>> So that's made from seaweed?
>> That's made from seaweed.
>> And what percentage
of it is carbon?
>> 20% to 30%, depending
on how you make it.
But what we're
trying to do is also
make that carbon stay in that
soil for as long as possible.
So if you put the
biochar in the soil,
you're providing a long-term
benefit to soil structure
and to nutrients, but you
have to make it the right way.
So there are a few
tricks in the process.
>> I can imagine.
>> Yeah.
And once you've
mastered those, you
can develop a product
that provides the carbon
benefit, and some fertilizer,
and some trace elements,
and try and get the
best of everything.
>> So a little of the carbon
dioxide that was warming
the atmosphere has
now been captured,
right here in my hand.
And Rocky's seaweed
roadshow has one last stop,
because Australia
is at the forefront
of a pollution-busting
seaweed discovery.
[COWS MOOING]
>> So Tim, there might be
something else we can do with
this seaweed.
>> Oh, yeah?
>> We're in cattle country.
>> Yes.
>> And what you can do is you
can feed seaweed to cows and it
cuts down their
production of methane.
>> That sounds fantastic.
Well, if you get
a big reduction,
that would be
really substantial.
>> Methane has 23 times
the effect of CO2 in terms
of greenhouse gas warming.
So yeah, it will make
a big difference.
>> Sure.
That sounds good.
But does the meat end
up tasting like fish?
>> Aw, that's very funny.
No.
[CHUCKLING]
[COWS MOOING]
>> Strange to think putting a
bit of seaweed in a cow's diet
might be such good
news for all of us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Spending time with
Rocky has really
opened up for me the
potential seaweeds offer.
And this is just the
start, because Australia
leads the world in
other valuable ways
it can be used, including
in our own diet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'm heading 2,000 kilometers
south to the town of Nowra,
to meet a scientist turned
seaweed entrepreneur.
Pia Winberg has spent her
life researching how seaweed
can contribute to human health.
Five years ago, she set
up her own business.
So Pia, you used
to be an academic,
but now you're a businesswoman.
So why is that?
>> Well, Tim, I found that doing
the research on how seaweed can
save the world, it wasn't
really getting through.
So the only way to really
do that was to make seaweed
mean something to people.
And people have
actually forgotten
how seaweed can
actually help them
every day, in their
nutrition and health,
even in future medical
devices that we're
starting to do research on.
>> Pia's work is part of
a growing body of evidence
on the health
benefits of seaweed.
>> My friend Dave is a great
chef, and makes some fantastic,
innovative cuisine.
>> Hello, Dave.
>> Hi, Tim, how are you?
>> Good, mate, good.
>> Hi, Dave.
Here's the seaweed we just
harvested and milled for you.
>> Oh, fantastic.
I've just made
you some flour out
if you want to get
straight into--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> --fresh pasta.
So if you want to grab two
teaspoons, right into there.
I'll crack a few eggs.
>> It's my first seaweed
pasta ever, Dave,
so forgive me if it's
not what it should be.
>> No worries.
>> Pia, how long have
people been eating seaweed?
>> There's records
from 13,000 years ago.
And so it's well-known
that seaweed's
been a part of many cultures
and their health and nutrition.
And that's what seaweed can
do in a pasta like this.
We're just putting back
nutrients-- iodine, iron,
magnesium, a whole lot of
really important trace elements.
Also, we've got
seaweed dietary fibers
that are really
important for gut health.
And we're about 50%
deficient in dietary fibers.
And that's been linked to a
lot of our chronic disorders--
obesity and
diabetes-- and seaweed
can really help overcome those.
And of course
there's the omega-3.
>> Add a little bit more.
>> There's evidence omega-3
fatty acids play a part
in the functioning of our brain.
And you can get omega-3s
from eating seaweed.
Gee, it looks good on
the plate, doesn't it?
>> It's beautiful.
>> Fantastic.
>> Here you go, guys.
Enjoy your seaweed pasta.
>> Thank you, Dave.
Wonderful.
>> Thanks, Dave.
>> Enjoy.
>> Mm, it's good.
I can feel my mental processes
improving by the bite.
It's fantastic.
Mm.
>> It's just got that edge
on pasta without seaweed.
>> Yeah, and I guess seaweed's
got a bad reputation, really.
People see it on the beaches,
stinky piles, and think,
oh, I don't know whether
I want to eat that.
But this is about as far
from that as you can imagine.
>> Well, people see seaweed
at the end of its life.
That would be like going to a
compost heap in your backyard.
You wouldn't eat that either.
But seaweed in its
natural environment
is stunning, beautiful,
and full of flavor.
>> Yeah.
But the uses of seaweed
go well beyond food.
There's serious money to be
made by those who understand
seaweed's complex biology.
>> In Australia, we have really
unique seaweeds in our oceans.
We can come to the plate
with a whole new suite
of species that are unexplored,
with exciting molecules.
And the products
we've found really
could help a lot of people.
>> And the most valuable of
all may be products designed
for use inside the human body.
It's an idea inspired by a
traditional use of seaweed.
Pia, has anyone
checked this for crabs?
[CHUCKLING]
>> The ancient form
of seaweed bath.
Something I learned in Ireland,
where they're still doing it.
Enjoy it, hop in.
>> If it was good
enough for my ancestors,
I suppose I got to give it a go.
Still-- oh my goodness.
>> How does that feel, Tim?
>> Oh, it feels slimy,
Pia, very slimy.
Oh my goodness gracious.
>> What you're feeling Tim is
the molecules from the seaweed.
So the molecules in seaweed
are sort of basically
very compatible with the human
because we're both salty.
>> I feel a bit too
compatible at the moment.
[CHUCKLING]
Now is the degree of
contact between the seaweed
and me at all
important, or is it a--
>> Yeah, go ahead,
put it all over you.
That's the point.
>> Well, here we go.
[SHUDDERING GROAN]
My God.
Oh, that feels strange.
[CHUCKLING]
The bath is full of
freshly-harvested Australian
crayweed.
Piping hot, this species
oozes buckets of thick slime.
That's the most
peculiar feeling.
[CHUCKLING]
>> Looks great, Tim.
>> I'm sorry.
It really is very strange.
It's these slimy gels that
hold seaweed together.
And they're remarkably
similar to the ones that
hold human bodies together.
So researchers want
to make use of them.
[SIGHING]
That's lovely.
It's part of a
promising new field
of science called glycobiology.
Wow, now Pia, this
is a science lab.
This is fantastic.
>> Yeah, it's fun,
isn't it, Tim.
This is all of our
seaweed babies.
>> And she's spent 20 years
hunting Australia's coastline
for seaweeds with the
most valuable properties.
It's a bit like
panning for gold.
>> What we've got here are
unique Australian species that
we've actually done the genetic
fingerprinting or bar-coding,
if you like.
>> So this is the mother lode.
>> It's our mother lab.
>> Mother lab.
Very cool.
All right.
She's been searching for
a seaweed gel molecule
with a genetic fingerprint that
mirrors the connective tissues
of human skin.
>> So come in here and see our
skin matrix molecule that is
really exciting for us.
It's sitting in this
yellowish solution,
but we really want to purify it
to be able to make use of it.
And so we can do that--
I'll do that in
this vessel here.
>> Having found
the right seaweed,
then Pia has to extract the
glyco molecules to reveal
the most expensive seaweed
product yet discovered.
>> And you'll see
here the purification.
>> Yep, that's already
happened, hasn't it?
That's flocculation.
>> Yep.
>> So this is your most
valuable product is it?
>> That's right.
This is the molecule that's
just like the connective tissue
in our own body, which
means we can use it
for high-end medical
devices and applications,
even printing new tissue
or injecting it into knees
to prevent osteoarthritis.
For molecules like that, you're
paying like $10,000 a kilo.
>> Wow, so that's the top shelf.
>> Top-shelf product, Tim.
>> All right, very good.
And researchers at the
University of Wollongong
have regenerated
kneecap cartilage
by injecting stem cells
into her seaweed gel.
And different seaweeds
have different properties.
Once you identify
those properties,
you can make other
surprising things.
And what about this one here?
This looks like plastic almost.
>> Yes, so we're doing some
more chemistry with the seaweeds
here, and pulling out some
really interesting materials.
>> So currently, plastics
are made out of fossil fuels.
So if you could make
plastics out of seaweed,
you're turning a liability
into a huge asset surely.
>> Yeah, that's right, Tim.
I mean, the molecules that
we are turning into plastics
now are from algal
plants to start with.
And what we're really
doing here is growing them
from the biosphere we've got
instead of digging them up
out of the ground like fossils.
So another material, Tim, is--
look at this one, it's
just like leather.
And that's from
the same seaweed.
>> Wow.
I go to Bavaria occasionally.
Do you think I could get a nice
pair of lederhosen in seaweed?
>> I'm sure you'd sing a lot
better with pants like that,
Tim.
>> Yodel-- we'd be yodeling.
That's fantastic.
Given continued investment,
the work going on here
could see interesting
results in years to come.
The artificial implants
certainly show some promise.
>> This facility is a ghost
town of what once was a great
industry.
The Shoalhaven Paper Mill used
to employ about 600 people back
in the day.
So what was once
a large industry,
we're seeding it
with the future.
>> Central to the operation
is her seaweed farm.
Well, this really is
industrial scale, Pia.
This is great to see.
>> Yeah, well, this is
how you grow seaweed fast.
A few hundred kilos of
seaweed in these pools, Tim.
>> Right.
Well, I can feel the
seaweed down there, Pia.
Would you mind if I pull
a bit out and have a look?
>> I wouldn't do
that, though, Tim.
>> OK.
>> This is pretty secret
seaweed that we're working with
for these very special molecules
that we're pulling out.
>> OK, well I don't want to
reveal any industrial secrets.
But just looking at this
here, they're bubbling.
What's going on here?
What is it that's bubbling up?
>> So that's carbon dioxide
sequestration in action.
And there's not
many places on Earth
where it would happen
faster than right here.
>> Wow, OK.
And the CO2 is coming from--
where are you
getting the CO2 from?
>> Well, that's from the
fermentation from the wheat
refinery processes.
>> And is that that
thing over there?
>> That's it over there, Tim.
>> Turning wheat into flour
creates carbon dioxide,
which is piped across
to the seaweed farm.
It's dissolved into the water
tanks to help the seaweed grow.
I think what Pia's building
here is pretty inspiring.
She's taken a weed
that so many of us
ignore and discovered
properties that
hint at unexpected
benefits for human health.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've been surprised at the
things this humble weed can do,
and it has me thinking
about an even bigger task.
It's something
close to my heart.
For many years,
I've been involved
in issues around climate
change, and right now,
the levels of carbon dioxide in
our atmosphere are a problem.
And that's where seaweed
might really help.
Seaweed grows by using the
sun's energy in photosynthesis.
And as it does so, it
takes carbon dioxide
that's dissolved in the oceans
and builds its own tissues.
Ultimately, that
CO2 in the oceans
has come from the atmosphere.
And this stuff can grow 60
meters a year in some cases.
And it's a lot safer
locked up in seaweed
than it is in the
atmosphere or in the oceans.
And I'm wondering if we covered
the oceans with seaweed farms
whether we could draw
down enough carbon
to even reverse climate change.
And that's what I
want to find out.
Could you farm seaweed
on the open ocean
to draw down carbon
from the atmosphere?
To do so, I need to
leave these shores
in search of some of the biggest
seaweed farms on the planet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've come to Seoul,
capital of South Korea.
It's a city 2,0000 years old,
with its roots in the past
and its eyes on the future.
And I've arrived on a
most auspicious day,
Buddha's birthday, according
to tradition, his 2,561st.
[TRADITIONAL SINGING]
It's like nothing
I've ever seen before.
All of these lanterns
are hung with prayers.
And I've got one of my own.
I've just asked for a great
seaweed harvest for Korea
on Buddha's birthday.
So it's got to come true.
Wow, that's so cool.
Seaweed is one of the great
traditions of Korean culture,
and 50 million people
use a lot of it.
Tomorrow, I'll get
my first chance
to see the scale of the
Korean seaweed enterprise.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'm starting my journey
in a murky Seoul dawn.
I've been to Seoul
a couple of times.
And every time I arrive here,
the air pollution gets worse.
[CLEARING THROAT]
As you can tell.
People are wearing masks.
There's not many
people on the streets.
And it's becoming a real issue,
right across Northeast Asia.
This is fine particulate
pollution, nasty stuff.
It comes from cars,
and power stations,
and other heavy industry.
And it's becoming a
big health problem.
I'll be glad to get to the
coast to breathe some fresh air
and to see some seaweed.
I think our climate's
future might
depend on growing it big-scale.
[TRAIN ZOOMING BY]
Scientists think
there might be a place
to store such huge
quantities of seaweed carbon
that global warming
could be rolled back.
There's one big idea
behind my seaweed quest,
and that is that, given
certain circumstances,
seaweed can store
carbon at a bigger scale
and more permanently than any
plant you can see out there.
So we're on the
land at the moment,
but the ocean is
very, very deep.
Any carbon that plants
capture in this area here
just keeps on interchanging
with the atmosphere over time.
Trees grow, and then
they die, and they rot.
The carbon stays in the system.
But if we could somehow grow
seaweed out here, and then
either use the
seaweed for something
and toss the carbon into the
deep, or just put the seaweed
itself into the
deep ocean, once it
gets down below
about a kilometer,
that carbon isn't coming back.
That's stored not
quite as permanently
as geological carbon
like coal and so forth,
but as far as we're concerned
with the climate crisis,
it is out of the system.
Half the planet is
covered in oceans
three kilometers deep or more.
It's potentially a
huge carbon store.
But the amount of seaweed
needed to take advantage of it
suggests a seaweed industry
that's beyond my imagination.
So that's why I'm on my way to
the biggest seaweed industry
event in the world.
[TRAIN ZOOMING BY]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's being hosted far in the
south, on the island of Wando.
And their international
seaweed expo
is like nothing I
could have imagined.
Hello.
150 countries have
sent delegations.
Half a million people have
been through the gates.
This is just amazing.
This expo has taken
over the town.
At a cost of $10
million, this expo
is a serious
investment in seaweed,
backed by the top end of town.
[SPEAKING KOREAN]
>> And seaweed's future
is what I've come to see.
This is the big one.
This is the one that just
might save the world.
There's evidence of
seaweed innovations,
like seaweed bioplastics
and materials,
even signs of seaweed biofuels.
I meet an entrepreneur
who wants to save forests
by making paper from seaweed.
>> We have to change the way
to making pulp and paper from
the wood.
So seaweed pulp can
prevent global warming.
>> Fantastic, now.
Here's a whole house
made of seaweed.
It's an experimental
one, but I tell you,
it's pretty impressive.
This expo is proof the global
seaweed industry is innovating.
Very good.
There we go.
>> Elbow.
>> An elbow.
And not all of
these will take off.
We've got toothpaste
here as well.
If you want white
teeth, use seaweed.
So many products.
Very good, thank you.
But the powerhouse driving
all this innovation
in the seaweed industry is
a multi-billion dollar food
business.
Oh, that's bracing.
Thank you very much.
Very good.
[CHUCKLING]
It's good to see
scale and innovation.
Both will be needed if
we're going to store carbon
in the deep ocean.
[SPEAKING KOREAN]
>> Thank you.
I don't know what
sort of seaweed it is,
but it's pretty bloody good.
But feeding this industry must
be big-scale seaweed farming,
and I want to find it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The island of Wando is
just one of hundreds
of islands in an
archipelago clustered
around the southern
foot of Korea.
And they produce a million
tons of seaweed a year.
And I shouldn't have
to go far to find it.
I understand that
the top of this hill
up here is the very
best place to see one
of those famous seaweed farms.
And I'm really
keen to get a look,
because I think it's like
looking into the future.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'm looking for
the kind of scale
that could fill a million square
kilometers with seaweed farms.
Wow.
The scale of this is
almost unbelievable.
As far as I can see to the
horizon, there's seaweed farms.
The scale of seaweed farming
here is really astonishing.
As far as I can see,
there's little buoys
that the seaweed hangs from.
Suspended from these buoys
are tens of thousands
of meters of rope, all
growing seaweed in the sun.
Is this the seaweed
farming system
that could roll out
across the world's oceans
to help reverse climate change?
To learn the secrets of
growing seaweed big scale,
I've come to meet Korea's
leading authority on seaweed,
Professor Ik Kyo Chung.
Oh, hello.
Professor Chung.
Yeah, great to see you.
Thank you, good.
So this is our boat here?
>> Yes.
>> And we have to hurry.
The seaweed boat is leaving,
and I want to be on it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It seems to me that
seaweed farming
has been part of Korean
culture for a very long time.
>> Yes, very long time.
We have a long history.
>> Hundreds of years or--
>> Well, more than
that, I think.
>> Really?
>> Yeah.
>> And it seems to me the
country has developed a really
deep expertise in seaweed
growing and genetics.
Is it well advanced,
that knowledge here?
>> Yeah, that's right.
>> We're looking at this
vast field of seaweed here.
You're obviously
growing large amounts.
[WINCH CREAKING]
It's what I hoped to find.
This is commercial-scale
seaweed farming.
The equipment, the experience,
it's all here, and so
is the seaweed.
These farmers are
growing a species
of kelp called laminaria,
and it grows very fast.
Oh, look at this stuff, mate.
How long has this been growing?
>> I think just one season.
>> One season, wow.
So just through the winter?
>> Yeah, just the winter, yeah.
>> Huge growth.
>> Yeah, huge growth.
>> On just one line is
two tons of laminaria,
nearly a third of
which is carbon.
There's maybe 2/3 of a ton of
carbon right in front of me.
I can taste it.
>> It's just a little bit salty.
>> Oh yeah, it's good, huh?
It's nice.
>> It's a sea vegetable.
>> Yeah.
A seaweed breakfast?
Very nice.
>> Yeah, that's right.
>> I think I'm becoming Korean.
[CHUCKLING]
Chung has researched how much
carbon seaweed can store.
Just 100 square
meters of seaweed
can capture 16 tons
of carbon a year.
That's a crucial number,
and a very encouraging one.
But because seaweeds don't
live for as long as trees,
they've not been accepted
as carbon storage solutions.
So you've done
the basic science,
but is anyone being paid for
sequestering carbon in seaweed?
>> No, not yet.
Because everyone wants to
do it in some terrestrial
environment, like trees,
those kinds of things,
so you can see the trees--
oh, there's carbon there.
But seaweed, you cannot see.
>> So they're not looking
at deep ocean sequestration.
>> No, not yet.
Seaweed cannot grow in open sea
because a lack of nutrients.
Offshore is like a desert.
I think that's an
idea coming from you.
>> Well, I'm keen on the idea
of open-ocean seaweed farming,
and I know people
are working on it.
And seeing this
massive farm makes
me think it might be possible.
But this visit has
highlighted a problem.
All the seaweed
growing around me
feeds off nutrients that
wash off the land, like they
were at Magnetic Island.
It's a coastal phenomenon.
Seaweeds need to be close
to the surface, where
there's sunlight.
But in the open
ocean, the nutrients
are down too deep for
the seaweeds to reach.
So if we're going to try
to sink lots of carbon
with ocean-based farms, we need
to find them the nutrients.
And I need to find
someone who's working
on that part of the problem.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But much of the seaweed
expo is impressive.
All of this money and enterprise
is driving real innovation.
It's got me thinking.
Oh, I can smell.
What's something useful we
could make with seaweed that
could store carbon long term?
The more carbon we take out
of the atmosphere, the better.
[PHONE RINGING]
Time to get some help.
>> Hello?
>> Hi, Adam, Tim Flannery.
>> Hi, Tim.
How are you?
>> I'm very well, thank you, and
I'm wondering if you can help
me with something.
I need someone to make
me some seaweed bricks.
>> Yeah, OK.
I don't see why not.
>> Now, we use billions
of bricks every year,
but a seaweed brick could
store carbon drawn out
of the atmosphere.
>> --with this stuff.
You want to build something that
people actually really like.
>> Doctor Adam Bumpus is an
expert in carbon economics
and innovation.
He's found a team with expertise
in creating new building
products from natural materials.
These are bricks that need
no energy to fire them
and no cement to
stick them together.
>> Well, bricks, we can have,
like, the interlocking is A,
and the kind of paste is B.
>> By adding seaweed
to those products,
I hope they can store carbon in
such a way that it won't return
to the atmosphere
for a long time.
It's out of harm's way.
But it means turning squishy
seaweed into a rock-hard
brick--
I've got some seaweed here
that I got from the beach.
>> Oh, wow.
>> Have a whiff.
--and I'm sure
that won't be easy.
>> That's an
interesting material.
>> Can we turn this into
a brick, do you think?
Doctor Rackel San Nicolas
and engineering student Phil
are hard at work in
the geopolymers lab.
They'll need to find a way to
keep the seaweed dry and stable
so it can become a
sturdy part of the brick.
>> Let's check out the hemp
seaweed sample we made.
And that's held
together quite nicely.
Oh, that took very little effort
at all to make that crumble.
This one's a fail.
>> I never underestimate human
beings chasing a goal under
pressure.
But I fear I've set
a challenge here
that's close to impossible.
Back in Australia,
I'm looking for ways
to grow seaweed on the
scale I saw in Korea,
but way out in the ocean.
Because to draw down
enough carbon dioxide
to roll back global
warming, it would have
to be grown on a huge scale.
Professor Chung has given
me some pretty conservative
estimates of
seaweed crop yields.
And using those, I can estimate
that if you wanted to go down
a gigaton of carbon, you'd
need to plant a seaweed
farm around the size
of South Australia,
a million square kilometers.
If you wanted to offset
all of human emissions,
so draw down all
of the carbon we're
putting in the atmosphere,
you'd need a seaweed
farm the size of Asia.
That would be 9% of the world's
ocean covered in seaweed farms.
I don't think I'm going to
see that in my lifetime.
But I do think it's
realistic to look
at covering 1% of the world's
ocean in seaweed farms.
And if we did that,
we'd be pulling down
5 gigatons of carbon
a year, and that
would be an enormous
help in terms
of addressing climate change.
Every year, we put
about 50 gigatons--
that's 50 billion tons--
of carbon dioxide or
equivalent into the atmosphere,
where it causes climate change.
But seaweed can draw this
carbon out of the atmosphere.
Five gigatons would make
a noticeable difference.
20 would make a big one.
But if seaweeds
are going to help,
we need to grow them
in the open ocean.
And there's a snag.
Seaweeds photosynthesis
using the sun's energy,
but they also need nutrients.
And in the open
ocean, the nutrients
are down too deep for the
seaweeds to reach them.
Growing seaweed in the
ocean will take great feats
of marine engineering.
But scientists and
engineers are starting
to work on the problem.
I've just came across this
rather extraordinary proposal.
It's being funded in part by the
Australian federal government.
And it concerns the
development of what's
called a marine permaculture
array in the Indian Ocean.
Now, that array will consist
of a 100-meters-squared grid
that will be used to grow
seaweed and other seafood.
What's amazing about it is it'll
be operating in the deep ocean.
It won't be tethered
to the bottom.
It will be guided by satellites.
And out there in the
deep ocean, there's
no seaweed growing now
because there's no nutrients.
So whoever's put this
together has found a way
to access those deep nutrients
and feed the seaweeds
in these permaculture arrays.
To find out just how they're
pulling up the nutrients,
I'm speaking to the man behind
the plan, eco-entrepreneur Dr.
Brian Von Herzen.
On our marine permaculture,
we run a long pipe
down several hundred
meters into the sea.
That's where the nutrients are.
And we pump them
up to the seaweed
with a combination of wind,
and wave, and solar power.
We're estimating that for
an investment of around $5
million, we can see a potential
for yields of $1 million
for the kelp biomass,
and another million
every year for the fish.
>> Wow, fantastic.
And tell me, how
long is it going
to take to get this operational?
>> Well, we're expecting this
system to be operational later
this year.
We're testing the
hardware out this summer
in Woods Hole, Massachusetts.
And we're hoping to deploy the
system next year in Australia
with further support.
>> Wow, so the first one's
only a few months off.
That's amazing.
>> Oh, thank you so much.
>> Yeah.
And you know, I really think
that you're on to something
very fundamental here,
and something very big.
So congratulations.
I can hardly wait to
see how it develops.
>> Thank you, Tim.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'll be interested to see
how Brian's technology copes
in the open ocean, and whether
it can deliver a result.
Brian believes that his
array should scale up
to seaweed farms a
square kilometer in size.
And to draw down a
billion tons of carbon
from the atmosphere every
year, you'd need a million
of those farms floating in
the world's oceans, growing
fish and capturing carbon.
It'll be ambitious, challenging,
and certainly expensive.
And this plan makes
one big assumption,
that all the seaweed will
sink to the ocean bottom
where it stays
out of harm's way.
I'm meeting a
scientist with doubts,
an expert in how carbon is
stored, not in the ocean
but in wetlands.
And he's not so sure the
deep ocean will easily
store the carbon from seaweed,
sometimes called macroalgae.
How do you feel about
this potential opportunity
for seaweed farming?
If we take this seaweed and
sink it into the deep ocean,
is that carbon going to stay
there effectively forever?
>> I've got some
reservations, admittedly.
Does it end up going
into the sediments,
and does it end up getting
preserved in those sediments?
I think that's the
big research gap.
>> Right.
>> I want to see some research
and data that we see that
macroalgae end up in
those deep sea areas.
But does something munch it up?
>> Fair enough.
If seaweed is munched up before
it gets to the deep ocean,
its carbon can return
to the atmosphere.
So it needs to reach the
deep ocean fast, or be buried
in ocean sediments where it's
safe from the microbes that
munch it up.
Sediments are a
natural carbon store,
and Peter shows me how
they work in mangrove mud.
>> The microbes just can't
really attack the carbon,
so it's the perfect place
to store our carbon.
>> And the bottom
of the core here,
how old do you think this is?
>> Look, if we have one
centimeter a year of accretion,
let's say that's
about 60 centimeters,
so maybe 60 years
old, about that.
>> So that carbon really
has been safely stored there
for as long as I've
been alive, anyway.
>> That's right.
>> Well, that is
very convincing.
In this mangrove
mud, it's too cold,
and there's not enough
oxygen for the microbes
to munch up the
carbon stored here.
>> And these ecosystems will
store the carbon in the ground
for thousands of years.
They retire it from
the carbon cycle,
grabbing it out
of the atmosphere
and putting it into the ground.
It's a watery grave,
and it'll stay there.
>> Mangroves are clearly a
great place to store carbon,
but they're relatively
few in number.
To store all the carbon we need
to draw out of the atmosphere,
something much bigger is needed.
So can the deep oceans do it?
The answers won't come easily.
The deep ocean is more alien
than anything on Earth.
But if seaweed gets
into the deep ocean,
there should be evidence of it.
One team has scoured deep sea
surveys from around the world,
and they think
there is evidence.
>> And we were surprised to
find many records of seaweeds
in the deep ocean, on
the deep sea floor,
several thousand meters down.
So not only are they able to
be exported there, but also
really fast, since
they're not decomposed
before getting there.
That's deeper than
one kilometer.
Then we talk about
it being sequestered
for considerable time scales,
like several centuries.
>> Wow, really, really exciting.
That's fantastic, Dorte.
Dorte thinks that 173 million
tons of seaweed carbon
is naturally sequestered in
ocean sediment every year,
90% in the deep oceans.
Dorte's study is showing
that lots of coastal seaweed
is already finding its
way into the deep ocean,
and that the carbon
in that seaweed
is staying down there out of
the atmospheric carbon cycle.
I guess the big
thing we don't know
is, if we do this on
an industrial scale
and grow seaweed farms that are
transporting lots of seaweed
into the deep oceans, what the
consequence of that will be.
We won't know till
we try it, I guess.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Ultimately, both mangrove
wetlands and the deep
will be needed to store the
carbon that we must draw out
of the atmosphere.
And I'm not done with seaweed.
I've set a challenge
to find out if it might
be possible to store
its carbon in the houses
and cities of tomorrow.
I want to find out if the
idea of seaweed bricks
is a real possibility
or a slimy dead end.
[BELL CLANGING, TRAFFIC HUMMING]
Us humans are just beginning
our seaweed journey,
but I'm nearing the end of mine.
I'm here to meet Adam Bumpus
to see how he's getting on
with those seaweed bricks.
I wanted Adam and
his team to see
if they could create an
entirely new way to use seaweed.
I'm hoping it could be the
foundation of a new industry
if they've made it work.
Hey, Adam.
>> Hey, Tim.
>> Great to see you.
>> Good to see you, too.
How are you?
>> Good, thank you.
Good.
But I must say, you've kept me
in suspense about these bricks.
>> Yeah.
So we've had some
issues with the bricks.
I've got to be honest.
>> All right.
>> But we've found some stuff
that is really exciting,
and that's what I'd
like to show you today.
>> Seaweed isn't a promising
material to turn into a brick.
So what have we
got here, Rackel?
>> So it's actually
very, very interesting.
>> Is this your experiment?
>> Exactly.
So that's completely a failure.
But what we are very happy
about is we found why.
This seaweed apparently
is extremely expandable.
So as soon as we are
putting it in contact
with any type of solution,
the solution that
is inside the usual
concrete, it expands.
>> Yes.
Dr. San Nicolas tested all
geopolymer concrete solutions.
Could one stop
seaweed expanding?
>> But we move on to, actually,
the big discovery of these past
two days.
[CHUCKLING]
>> Ta da.
>> It actually,
in this solution,
potassium silicate and potassium
hydroxide, in this case,
you've got very, very little
expansion compared to--
>> Yes, indeed.
>> --the other one.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> So we end up with
this wonderful product.
>> Well, now that's
much more like it.
So this is a building material.
>> I truly believe so.
>> That is great.
>> We can do
structural material.
>> Australia alone uses 1
billion bricks and millions
of tons of concrete a year.
If the world could replace
a fraction of its bricks
and concrete with a
material that's cement-free,
low-energy, and a safe
storehouse for carbon, maybe
what I've seen here today
is another way seaweed
can help save the world.
And I'm interested to know
whether Adam's design team see
these bricks as a viable
alternative for the building
industry.
>> Texture's bloody great, a bit
of playfulness to it, you know.
And not only that, it can
be smoothened out as well.
So we can get other textures.
So a really flexible kind
of item, flexible material.
>> And that can be polished,
too, can't it, Rackel,
and get a shine to it?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, looking at it, I'm
quite amazed by how it looks,
actually.
So it will be really
interesting to how
the tests go with it all.
And if it can get the same
strength ratings as bricks,
I can't see why there's--
what the limitations to this
material would be.
>> Sustainability is something
that is in the agenda.
And we have the responsibility
to actually tell
the client this exists,
and we could use it,
and these are the benefits.
>> And perhaps this is how
we push back against climate
change, brick by brick.
I've taken this journey to find
out if this humble weed could
save the world.
>> Oh, there we go.
>> Well, that's a
healthy-looking specimen.
>> Oh yeah, that's a
beautiful fish, isn't it?
I've see how we could be
feeding the world on protein
from seafood farmed with
the help of seaweed--
So what volume can you
put through this plant?
--how seaweed could help
clean up polluted water--
>> A million liters a day.
>> Go through this?
>> Yes.
>> --how seaweed carbon
can be stored in biochar--
Look at that.
Beautiful stuff there.
--and could help reduce
greenhouse gas emissions from
cattle--
>> Yes, you can feed
seaweed to cows,
and they reduce their
production of methane.
>> --and the many unlikely
things that could be used
to create.
>> Look at this one.
It's just like leather.
>> So this as a
building material.
>> It is a building material.
>> But I've been most excited
by the potential to grow seaweed
to slow climate change by
absorbing carbon dioxide from
the atmosphere in
huge, open-ocean farms.
Wow, the scale of this
is almost unbelievable.
I think these technologies hint
at solutions our world needs.
But how much might they help?
>> So Tim, you've been all
over the world looking at this
stuff.
>> Yes.
But I'd like to know
what it all adds up to.
>> So we've got to
get some numbers down.
>> We do, yeah, yeah.
>> Well, why don't
we pop in here?
>> Great.
>> Try and see if we can
find a room, and we'll--
>> Fantastic
>> --we'll get it down.
>> All right.
Adam's a carbon economy
and innovation expert.
We can't be exact,
but some estimates
will help gauge the potential
of the technologies I've seen.
So Adam, I'd love to get some
figures around these areas
to see how much carbon we
could sequester from seaweed.
>> Yeah, good call.
Well, here's an interesting
one for protein.
It seems like if people change
their diets, potentially,
we can actually use sustainable
fish associated with these
seaweed farms that could produce
around about 11.8ish gigatons
of savings per year.
>> That is a massive number.
>> That's a big number.
>> That's huge.
>> But this is assuming that
9 billion people on Earth each
eat 200 kilograms
of fish a year.
That's a lot.
So probably it's going to be
quite a bit less than that.
So why don't we say maybe it's
going to be a third of that.
>> All right.
So let's call it three?
>> Maybe three.
>> Yeah, three, yeah,
that sounds good.
>> So three gigatons per year.
>> So we're then
looking at feedstock.
>> Absolutely.
>> And some of the figures
I've seen are huge.
>> It seemed like something
around about 2.4 gigatons.
per year saved.
>> See, these are very
big savings, Adam,
much bigger than I was thinking
you'd be getting from that.
>> If all of the cattle in the
world ate a bit of seaweed.
>> And that's encouraging.
I think that's very good.
>> It could be good, yeah.
>> So the other area we
were looking at was biochar.
It is incredibly promising,
because it's not just
sequestering the
carbon, it's also
helping productivity
in nutrients.
>> I wouldn't be averse
to sort of a very,
very rounded preliminary
figure of one.
>> One.
All right, well, let's--
>> I'm thinking one gigaton.
>> All right, so we're going
to put on a gigaton there.
>> All right.
And so the other thing we
saw is of course manufacture
of plastics, clothing.
What sort of
figures do you think
we're looking at for that?
Plastics and clothing, it's--
it's difficult to understand.
But of course you
also don't have
to use oil for the
plastics and clothing now.
So there's a lot
of saving there.
It's just the
sequestering of it,
is the supplanting of these
emissions we have right now.
Pfft, why don't we stick
on a gigaton for each?
>> That sounds reasonable.
I think that's good.
>> OK, let's do that.
>> And finally, this
issue of storage,
which I think is
one of the big ones,
of if we can sink the seaweed
down below a kilometer
in the ocean, it's
stored permanently.
>> What was it, 9% of the
ocean, we could store--
>> That's right.
If you cover 9% of the world's
ocean in seaweed farms,
you could offset all of current
emissions, so 53 gigatons.
>> 53 gigatons.
>> Yeah, potentially, which is--
>> That's a lot.
I mean, that's everything
we emit right now,
which would be amazing.
But it's also a huge
amount of ocean mass.
>> It's like a seaweed
farm the size of Asia,
in the middle of--
>> Huge.
>> It's really big.
>> Right.
>> Even if we took a
tenth of that, and say,
let's say a tenth, that
would be ambitious.
But a tenth is still
live five gigatons, huh?
>> Let's put that in.
>> Give it a go.
OK, so what do we get there?
We got five, six, seven,
eight, 10.4, 13.4 gigatons.
Of course 13 billion
tons is just an estimate.
But if this were
possible, then it
would have an impact
on climate change.
This is not an impossible task.
>> No.
>> These are real.
They can happen now.
>> Biodegradable plastics
from seaweed, new feedstocks.
You know, this is a big future.
>> Yeah, this is exciting.
>> Right.
Let's get to work.
>> Absolutely.
Thanks, Tim.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Some of these are more likely
to bear fruit than others.
But scaling up any
of these concepts
will require billions
in investment.
But when transformative
new ideas grip the world,
the changes they create
can happen quickly
and sweep all technologies
into the dustbin of history.
We humans are
really intelligent.
And sometimes it seems to me
we can do almost anything.
When it comes to climate
change and seaweed,
I think we're really
onto something.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My last stop is the
most personal of all.
Dr. Alecia Bellgrove
is a seaweed scientist
who's developing a
project to farm seaweed
right here in Melbourne's
Port Phillip Bay.
It's where I grew up.
And I hope to see it once
again the flourishing habitat
I remember as a child.
Now, you know, this place used
to be my playground as a kid.
>> Well, there's
huge possibility.
So we need to think
carefully about where
we're farming the
seaweeds, what we're
going to do with the
seaweeds once we harvest them
from those farms.
My concern as an
ecologist and someone
that's also really excited
about the prospects
that seaweed farming
can bring is that we
need to just tread cautiously.
And we can often go into
things hammer and tongs
before we understand fully how
these things-- systems work.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Ocean farms are
yet to be tested.
But I feel they present a big
opportunity for Australia,
especially as our seaweed
stocks are so rich.
>> So we're sitting in a part
of the world that has got
the highest biodiversity.
So this is a hotspot of
biodiversity for seaweeds.
There's more seaweeds in
southeastern Australia
than there is in any
other part of the world.
So the potential is huge.
The understanding of what
we've got is very small.
>> Would you be surprised
if, within 500 meters of us,
there was a species of seaweed
that hadn't been described yet.
>> Not at all.
>> So just projecting
out 50 years,
how important do you think
the seaweeds growing within
a kilometer of us
here are going to be.
>> I think they've got
huge potential to be part
of our food security solutions.
>> Sounds to me is if you think
we've got a national treasure
here.
>> Absolutely.
>> When I think about what
wonders might be found
in Australia's seaweed
treasure trove,
it brings me a lot of hope.
The age of seaweed
may be upon us,
and I can't wait to see these
solutions start to unfold.